Add blog post about g/g v1.11/v1.12 (#150)
gardener/documentation: website/blog/2020-11/_index.md

---
title: Gardener v1.11 and v1.12 Released
linkTitle: Gardener v1.11 and v1.12
newsSubtitle: November 4, 2020
type: blog
publishdate: 2020-11-04
archivedate: 2020-12-31
authors:
- name: Tim Usner
  email: tim.usner@sap.com
  avatar: https://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/40451181?s=460&u=4df34635cf86b924700ef4152ec8462eeaa35721&v=4
aliases: ["/blog/2020/11/04/00"]
---

Two months after our last Gardener release update, we are happy again to present release v1.11 and v1.12 in this blog post. Control plane migration, load balancer consolidation, new security features are just a few topics we progressed with. As always, a detailed list of features, improvements, and bug fixes can be found in the [release notes](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases) of each release. If you are going to update from a previous Gardener version, please take your time to go through the action items in the release notes.

> ## Noteable Changes in v1.12

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Notable Changes in v1.12
```

Release v1.12, fresh from the oven, is shipped with plenty of improvements, features and some API changes we want to pick up in the next sections. 

> ### Functionless DNS Providers ([gardener/gardener#3036](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/3036))

Reviewer: Maybe add "Drop" in front? Otherwise at a glance it sounds like add support for that. Of course the text below is clear enough but you might want to consider people not reading the fine print :-)

This release drops the support for so-called functionless DNS providers. Those are providers in a shoot’s specification (`.spec.dns.providers`) which don’t serve the shoot’s domain (`.spec.dns.domain`), but are created by Gardener in the seed cluster to serve DNS requests coming from the shoot cluster. If such providers don’t specify a `type` or `secretName` the creation or update request for the corresponding shoot is denied.

### Seed Taints ([gardener/gardener#2955](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/2955))

> With the introduction of `seed.spec.settings`, we spent the seed object a dedicated section in favor of previously used taints `disable-capacity-reservation, disable-dns, invisible`. These already deprecated taints were still considered and synced for a certain time which allowed operators to switch their integration to the new `settings` field. As of version v1.12, support for the mentioned taints has been dropped and are automatically removed from seed objects. You may use the actual taint names in a future release of Gardener again to serve your own use-cases.

Reviewer: simplify, doesn't read right/easy. Try this or similar approach:

```suggestion
We reserved a dedicated section in `seed.spec.settings` for seed taints that replaces the taints `disable-capacity-reservation, disable-dns, invisible`. These already deprecated taints were still considered and synced for a certain time, which allowed operators to switch their integration to the new `settings` field. As of version v1.12, support for them has been dropped and they are automatically removed from seed objects. You may use the actual taint names in a future release of Gardener again to serve your own use-cases.
```

Author: I reworked the section a bit and hope the flow is better now.

Reviewer: Yep, sounds good.

> ### Load balancer events during shoot reconciliation ([gardener/gardener#3028](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/3028))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Load Balancer Events During Shoot Reconciliation ([gardener/gardener#3028](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/3028))
```

(same for other headlines)

Author: Pretty inconsistent to https://github.com/gardener/documentation/pull/126 headlines. Should we also introduce a capitalization policy 🤯

> As Gardener is capable of managing thousands of clusters, it is crucial to keep operation efforts at a minimum. This release demonstrates this endeavor by further improving error reporting to the end user. During a shoot’s reconciliation, Gardener creates `Services` of type `LoadBalancer` in the shoot cluster, e.g. for VPN or Nginx-Ingress addon, and waits for a successful creation. However, in the past we experienced that occurring issues from the party creating the load balancer (typically [Cloud-Controller-Manager]( https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/)) are only exposed in the logs or as events. Gardener now fetches these event messages in propagates them to the shoot status in case of a failure. Users can then often fix the problem themselves, if for example the failure discloses an exhausted quota on the cloud provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Gardener is capable of managing thousands of clusters, it is crucial to keep operation efforts at a minimum. This release demonstrates this endeavor by further improving error reporting to the end user. During a shoot’s reconciliation, Gardener creates `Services` of type `LoadBalancer` in the shoot cluster, e.g. for VPN or Nginx-Ingress addon, and waits for a successful creation. However, in the past we experienced that issues caused by the party creating the load balancer (typically [Cloud-Controller-Manager]( https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/)) are only exposed in the logs or as events. Gardener now fetches these event messages and propagates them to the shoot status in case of a failure. Users can then often fix the problem themselves, if for example the failure discloses an exhausted quota on the cloud provider.
```

### KonnectivityTunnel Feature Per Shoot([gardener/gardener#3007](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/3007))

Since release `v1.6` Gardener has been capable of reversing the tunnel direction from the seed to the shoot via the `KonnectivityTunnel` feature gate ([more information]( https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/reverse-tunnel.md)). With this release we make it possible to control the feature per shoot. We recommend to selectively enable the `KonnectivityTunnel`, as it is still in `alpha` state.

### Reference Protection ([gardener/gardener#2771](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/2771)), 
([gardener/gardener 1708419)](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/commit/17084191c752c206537b9506b54828f4d723d9b7))

> Shoot clusters may refer to external objects, like `Secrets` for specified DNS providers or they have a reference to an audit policy `ConfigMap`. Deleting those objects while any shoot still references them causes sever errors, often only recoverable by an immense amount of manual operations effort. To prevent such scenarios, Gardener now adds a new finalizer `gardener.cloud/reference-protection` to these objects and removes it as soon as the object itself becomes releasable. Due to compatibility reasons, we decided that the handling for audit policy `ConfigMaps` is delivered as an opt-in feature first, so please familiarize yourself with the necessary settings in the Gardener Controller Manager component config if you already plan to enable it.

Reviewer: > so please familiarize yourself with the necessary settings ....

If there's some helpful material focusing on that, this is a good place to add a reference.

### Watch Out Developers, Terraformer v2 Is Coming! ([gardener/gardener#3034](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/3034))

Although not only related to Gardener core, but still an important milestone to mention, is the preparation towards [Terraformer v2](https://github.com/gardener/terraformer/pull/48) in the [extensions library](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/tree/master/extensions). With Terraformer v2, Gardener extensions using Terraform scripts will benefit from great consistency improvements. Please check out [#3034](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/3034)) which demonstrates necessary steps to transition to Terraformer v2 as soon as it’s been released.

> ## Noteable Changes in v1.11

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Notable Changes in v1.11
```

---
title: Gardener v1.11 and v1.12 Released
linkTitle: Gardener v1.11 and v1.12
newsSubtitle: November 4, 2020
type: blog
publishdate: 2020-11-04
archivedate: 2020-12-31
authors:
- name: Tim Usner
  email: tim.usner@sap.com
  avatar: https://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/40451181?s=460&u=4df34635cf86b924700ef4152ec8462eeaa35721&v=4
aliases: ["/blog/2020/11/04/00"]
---

> Two months after our last Gardener release update, we are happy again to present release v1.11 and v1.12 in this blog post. Control plane migration, load balancer consolidation, new security features are just a few topics we progressed with. As always, a detailed list of features, improvements and bug fixes can be found in the [release notes](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases) of each release. If you are going to update from a previous Gardener version, please take your time to go through the action items in the release notes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two months after our last Gardener release update, we are happy again to present release v1.11 and v1.12 in this blog post. Control plane migration, load balancer consolidation, new security features are just a few topics we progressed with. As always, a detailed list of features, improvements, and bug fixes can be found in the [release notes](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases) of each release. If you are going to update from a previous Gardener version, please take your time to go through the action items in the release notes.
```

## Noteable Changes in v1.12

Release v1.12, fresh from the oven, is shipped with plenty of improvements, features and some API changes we want to pick up in the next sections. 

### Functionless DNS Providers ([gardener/gardener#3036](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/3036))

This release drops the support for so-called functionless DNS providers. Those are providers in a shoot’s specification (`.spec.dns.providers`) which don’t serve the shoot’s domain (`.spec.dns.domain`), but are created by Gardener in the seed cluster to serve DNS requests coming from the shoot cluster. If such providers don’t specify a `type` or `secretName` the creation or update request for the corresponding shoot is denied.

> ### Seed taints ([gardener/gardener#2955](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/2955))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Seed Taints ([gardener/gardener#2955](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/2955))
```

(same for other headlines)

### Reference protection ([gardener/gardener#2771](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/2771)), 
([gardener/gardener 1708419)](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/commit/17084191c752c206537b9506b54828f4d723d9b7))

Shoot clusters may refer to external object, like `Secrets` for specified DNS providers or they have a reference to an audit policy `ConfigMap`. Deleting those objects while any shoot still references them causes sever errors, often only recoverable by an immense amount of manual operations effort. To prevent such scenarios, Gardener now adds a new finalizer `gardener.cloud/reference-protection` to these objects and removes it as soon as the object itself becomes releasable.

### Support for Resource Quotas ([gardener/gardener#2627](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/2627))

> After the Kubernetes upstream change for externalizing the backing admission plugin has been accepted, we are happy to announce the support of [ResouceQuotas]( https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) for Gardener offered resource kinds. [ResouceQuotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) allow you to specify a maximum number of objects per namespace, especially for end-user objects like `Shoots` or `SecretBindings` in a project. Even though the admission plugin is enabled by default in the Gardener API Server, make sure the Kube Controller Manager runs the `resorucequota` controller as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the Kubernetes upstream change for externalizing the backing admission plugin has been accepted, we are happy to announce the support of [ResourceQuotas]( https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) for Gardener offered resource kinds. [ResourceQuotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) allow you to specify a maximum number of objects per namespace, especially for end-user objects like `Shoots` or `SecretBindings` in a project namespace. Even though the admission plugin is enabled by default in the Gardener API Server, make sure the Kube Controller Manager runs the `resourcequota` controller as well.
```

Besides the already known `Namespace` and Kubeconfig `Secret` validation, a new admission handler `Resource-Size-Validator` was added to the admission controller. It allows operators to restrict the size for all kinds of Kubernetes objects, especially sent by end-users to the Kubernetes or Gardener API Server. We address a security concern with this feature to prevent denial of service attacks in which an attacker artificially increases the size of objects to exhaust your object store, API server caches, or to let Gardener and Kubernetes controllers run out-of-memory. The [documentation](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/concepts/admission-controller.md#resource-size-validator) reveals an approach of finding the right resource size for your setup and why you should create exceptions for technical users and operators.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Deferring shoot progress reporting ([gardener/gardener#2909](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/2909)),

> Shoot progress reporting is the continuous update process of a shoot’s `.status` field while the shoot is being reconciled by Gardener. Many steps are involved during reconciliation and depending on the size of your setup, the updates might become an issue for the Gardener API Server which will refrain to process further requests for a certain period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Shoot progress reporting is the continuous update process of a shoot’s `.status.lastOperation` field while the shoot is being reconciled by Gardener. Many steps are involved during reconciliation and depending on the size of your setup, the updates might become an issue for the Gardener API Server which will refrain to process further requests for a certain period.
```

With `.controllers.shoot.progressReportPeriod` in Gardenlet’s component configuration, you can now delay these updates for the specified period.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
